---
title: "Entities"
layout: post
---

The "Joy of Design" series has cover a lot of ground so far. There is
still a bit more to go. I've covered delivery mechanisms, forms, and
writing use cases. I haven't talked about the actual business objects
yet. We know use cases collaborate with many different objects. It's
time to talk about them. They are entities. Entity is a board term on
purpose. An "entity" can be anything really. These classes represent
business concepts. You cannot pigeonhole them into models. There are
more roles than just model. Most importantly there are the nouns in
the applications--the concepts the application is all about.

Consider a CRM. There will be many different entities. `Customer`
jumps out right away (it _does_ stand for Customer Relation
Management). There will be many more. `Company`, `Account`, `Deal`, or 
`Invoice` to name a few. A blog has `Post` and `Comment`. A
classifieds site has `Ad`. I condsider these models because they map
cleanly to business concepts. Then there are things that don't follow
the same rules. There are things like `Twitter` for posting tweets.
You might consider this a service object with something like
`TweetService`. Then there are other things likes validators. They are
not models but simply used in some contexts. The point is that there
are many different kind of entities. Let's start off by covering
models.

## Model Classes

First up is a word of warning. I want you to think hard about what you
consider it a model. Is a model a simple `Struct` like class  or is some more
complicated object given to you by an ORM? If you sided with former
you're thinking in the right direction. If you're already thinking
about ORMs and persistence you need to stop that. This post has
nothing to do with persistence or storage at all. That is not
important. Models are not persistence and persistence does not make a
model. Now can continue.

Model classes are deceptively easy to implement. Let's create a
`Customer`.

```ruby
class Customer

end
```

Done. Well atleast with the first step. A customer will have some data
with it. This is also deceptively easy to implement.

```ruby
class Customer
  attr_accessor :given_name, :family_name
end
```

Hmmm. What if they have more complicated data like addresses? This one
is hard.

```ruby
class Customer
  attr_accessor :given_name, :family_name
  attr_accessor :addresses
end
```

I hope you get the idea by now. Model classes are just standard
classes. There is no magic in them at all. They have accessors just
like anything else. You add methods to class to encapsulate behavior.

```ruby
class Customer
  attr_accessor :given_name, :family_name
  attr_accessor :addresses

  def should_contact?
    if !recent_email? && purchased_product?
      true
    elsif !purchased_product? && opportunity?
      true
    elsif lead? && received_follow_up?
      true
    else
      false
    end
  end
end
```

I took the liberty of assuming methods were implemented. I think the
example illustrates the point. Classes encapsulate behavior. Just go
ahead and write them. It may seem scary at first but will pay
dividends. I can't express how _uncomplicated_ it is to create these
object. They have `attr_accessors`. Some methods are public. Some are
private. They have custom initializers. Some may have inner classes.
Some may even include modules. You know, they are Ruby classes.
Shocking right?

## Service Objects

I'll probably get some flack on the naming but such is life right?
This is the hardest problem in computer science. Here's my working
definition: a service object represents a context-less interaction
with the outside world which may have multiple implementations. Here
are some examples from my past projects. `PushService`. Accepts
`PushNotification` instances and sends them out using some sort of
push service (APN, GCM, WebSocket whatever). `TweetService` posts
tweets to twitter. `EmailService` for delivering emails. All these
objects exhibit a quality: they need to behave differently in tests
for obvious reasons. It does not make sense for tests to tweet or send
emails. I design all my service objects implementation free. The main
class delegates all actual work to an implemnetation object. The
implementation is then switched during tests. The methods are exposed
at the class level as well. Since these are context free interactions
there is no need to instantiate an object. Here's what they look like:

```ruby
class PushService
  class << self
    def implementation
      @implementation
    end

    def implementation=(impl)
      @implementation = impl
    end

    def push(notification)
      implementation.push notification
    end
  end
end
```

That's all there really is to it. I usually have at least three
implementations: the real one, a fake implementation for tests, and a
null implementation. I also prefer this setup because it makes it very
easy to switch implementations (obviously)! Want to send email with
sendgrid? Write an implementation. Want to send push notifications
over send mail? Write an implementation and hire a post worker.

## Abstract Post is Abstract

This post does not cover a lot of concrete details because it cannot.
These are the classes that represent an application. Every application
is different. There is no one size fits all approach. Hell, even if
every application was the same we could not agree on how they should
be implemented. We would disgree about what should be encapsulated
where, which methods should be public or private, or what exactly _is_
a service object? My point is that I cannot really give you so much
advice here. Only you know what needs to be coded.

We are nearing the end of the road though. The data layer needs
discussing. It must come up eventually. The next post will be an
indepth guide on how to separate data, persistence, and access using
the repository and query patterns.

I leave you with some code from the entities in one of my apps.
Hopefully this can make this abstract discussion a little more
concrete. Here is a model, service class, and an implementation test.

<script src="https://gist.github.com/ahawkins/db56a0c35a5d025aeb61.js"></script>
