---
layout: post
title: "I Give Up"
tags: [ember, javascript]
---

This is the tale of infinite frustration. This is also a tale of high
hopes and sadness. This is a tale of a horrible day of development.
One of those days where you think to my self: "Adam, why do you
actually do this?" Ya, it was a bad day.

## The Tale

Today my coworker [Paul Cowan (@dagda1)](https://twitter.com/dagda1) were working
on our Ember project. We decided to stay with `DS.FixtureAdapter` for
as long as possible. We wanted to do this because it made developing
the actual application easier and we didn't need to worry about API
stuff until we had gotten the client side abstractions right. Paul
described it as "living in a dream world." I believe he also used the
words "in Disneyland." I don't know if you've ever been to Disneyland,
but that place is fucked up. I was there on 4th of July years ago on a
vacation. There was almost a riot in front of Cinderella's castle.
Someone pushing a disabled person around in a wheel chair tried to run
is over. It was insanity. It was a nightmare. Just like today.

Our attack plan was simple. We will simply change the store's adapter
to a `DS.RESTAdapter` and just customize shit until we get it right.
We are using `ActiveModel::Serializers` so it should (*wink wink*) be
plug and play. Then I remembered this:

> It's more like plug and pray!

My friend Andrei said that. It was very so prefect. We did the boiler
plat code and were ready to turn the damn thing on. I don't know if
you've ever rebuilt a car before. It felt like that moment after you
do an engine swap, everything is ready, and you sit there and think:
"well, here we go." You sit down in the drivers seat and insert the
key into the ignition. You mentally cross of everything that could go
wrong. Did I put the piston rings in correctly? Are is my valve timing
right? There are so many ways you can completely explode your car, so
of course your nervous. I had been working on a semi-functional API
for a few days. We were at this point. I was 100% certain I'd see
1487324 errors in Chrome console. I thought I was mentally prepared
for the road ahead.

Paul saved the files and refreshed Chrome. We sat with bated breath
with what errors awaited us. The clock ticked. We waited to see if
anything weird happened. Nothing happened. We had some 404 which were
expected since not every endpoint was ready. But nothing helpful.
Literally nothing. Just nothing. The every so typical blank page
without any errors. Just a huge troll. We could see the Ember app
talking to the API. It was getting the data back, but nothing was
happening. Just nothing.

So we put on our debugging hats. Now, luckily I'm very familiar
Ember-Data's internals, I think more so than Paul is. I had a good
idea of where to start. So we open our files and throw a few debuggers
in there. Yay! Breakpoint. Ok, step, step, step, and step. It's doing
something. Step. WAIT. What just happened?! All of a sudden it jumped
up the stack into a `finally` block! Yay! The first of the missing
exceptions. Now, I don't even know _why_ this happened. 

This set the tone for the rest of this tale. This [method](https://github.com/emberjs/data/blob/master/packages/ember-data/lib/system/model/attributes.js#L29)
is called inside Ember Data's [deserialization](https://github.com/emberjs/data/blob/master/packages/ember-data/lib/system/serializer.js#L746) code.
We were able to detect where the error was coming from but had clue
why. We caught it above the `finally` block mentioned earlier. The
error's message was completely useless. The typical "undefined blah
blah". But we're able to determine that it was blowing up inside the
`eachAttribute` call. We tried to debug it but we couldn't figure it
out from the console. After an hour or so we figured out which model
class was blowing up. We simply dropped into the console and did
`Ember.get(App.BrokenModel, 'attributes')` and boom! We saw an
exception. The error was somewhat useful. But why was it swallowed?
Who knows, but we can fix this one. We decide to do that. Turns out we
had an association defined incorrectly in our code:

```javascript
App.Model.Foo = DS.Model.extend({
  bar: DS.belongsTo('App.IncorrectlySpelledClass')
});
```

Ember Data looped over all the attributes and blew up (correctly)
because `IncorrectlySpelledClass`. We had a few typos like this and we
fixed them and started over again. We still had a blank screen with no
errors in the console. Surely this wasn't right.

We needed access to the user's settings. This was a simple hash coming
back in the JSON. Our `User` model had a `settings` attribute declared
like this:

```javascript
App.User = DS.Model.extend({
  settings: DS.attr('object')
});
```

We put a `debugger` at the first place we did `user.get('settings')`.
Of course it was `undefined`. I knew this was problem with the
serializer. It took some well placed debuggers to find our missing
error. Still nothing on the console, just debugging, stepping, and
dumping stuff to the console. We got to an error that said: "there is
no transform defined for 'object.'". Ok. We know how to handle that.
It's pretty easy to fix.

```javascript
Adapter.registerTransform('object', {
  deserialize: function(value) {
    return Ember.isNone(value) ? value : JSON.parse(value)
  },

  serializer: function(value) {
    return Ember.isNone(value) ? value : JSON.stringify(value)
  }
});
```

That code is surprisingly obvious. If the value is JSON then parse. If
it's an object JSON-ify it. Save files and refresh Chrome. The
settings are still `undefined`. What the hell? So we put a debugger
into the `deserialize` method on the transform. Refresh the browser
and there we are. We execute the line `return Ember.isNone(value) ? value : JSON.parse(value)`
from the console. Exception is raised. Doh! The response body was
JSON. The entire response is parsed along with the settings hash. So
instead of parsing it, we just return it the object. Now, we
**finally** add the user's settings back from the server. This took a
good couple of hours. This took us a couple hours. A couple of very
frustrating hours. All of this was for one simple get request. We had
no idea how bad loading collections would be.

Now that we had the user, it was natural to load some of their data.
We fired off some `DS.Model.all()` requests and prayed for the best. I
can honestly say what came next lead to the worst programming day in
my life. I had never endured such frustration and confusion before
this day.

The requests made it to the server and all the data was correct. Paul
and I sat there and stared at a blank white screen. There was nothing.
No errors, no data. Nothing. Nothing of value. In fact it was the
least helpful thing. Imagine using linux for the first time and only
having a blinking terminal in front of you. You have no idea where to
begin, no idea what to do. You have no knowledge whatsoever.

Again, luckily for me I do have some knowledge. It simply impossible
that there are no exceptions. The API is not exactly what the client
expects. It's not completely implemented. Something has to be wrong
somewhere. Then there is the flip side of the coin. Surely Ember or
Ember data cannot be swallowing exceptions. Surely, any professional
programmer worth their salt would not program like this.

I could write on about what happened over the next 6 or 7 hours. I
could describe the countless `debugger` calls, wtf moments, and other
things we've all experienced as programmers. I'm not going to do that.
I'm just going to cut to the chase and tell you what happened. I've
already bitched enough about it (which as been very cathartic).
Instead I will focus on why this post is titled "I Give Up."

Paul and I spent a good 5 hours debugging why we there was no
exceptions. We figured it had to be something crazy related to ember's
run loop or god knows what black magic in Javascript. It turns out it
was simply staring us in the fucking face.

Internally Ember-Data uses a promise to send a request to the server
and when it's returned, then process the data. Here is the simple 4
line of code that ruined our day.

```javascript
return this.ajax(this.buildURL(root), "GET",{
  data: this.sinceQuery(since)
}).then(function(json) {
  Ember.run(adapter,'didFindAll', store, type, json);
});
```

The only really important of this snippet is the wrapped call to
`didFindAll`. This is the internal method used to parse the JSON and
create the model objects. So if the JSON is missing a key, or it's not
named correctly or whatever that is the method that will tell you
about it. 

Unfortunately that was not the case. The problem had been staring us
in the face the whole time. The code is processed in a promise
callback without an error handler. Yes you read that correctly.
Apparently nothing could ever go wrong in parsing json from a foreign
source. When has that ever happened to a web programmer? At the time of
this writing: **all exceptions related to reading/parsing JSON in
DS.RESTAdapter are swallowed and ignored.** HOW IS THIS EVEN
COMMITTED?! This is so bad that I don't even know what to say about
it. It's beyond fucked up.

I almost refused to believe that Ember Data's authors, who I know and
respect very much, would allow this to happen. How could something
like this possibly make into the code? There is a huge warning label
at the top of Ember Data's Github page. It states that it is not
production ready and all that jazz. There was a clear difference
between not being production ready and essentially telling the end
users to fuck themselves. I think swallowing and ignoring exceptions
related to the libraries core use case is telling the users to go fuck
themselves.

Paul and I are pretty experienced Ember developers. We've been doing
ember for almost 2 years now. The only reason I was able to debug this
problem was that I've written my own ember data adapters and done some
PRs to ED. However that many more people without internal
knowledge and would be utterly fucked in this situation. How are they
supposed to do anything? How many people would have picked up rails if they
had to debug issues inside ActiveRecords query generator to simply
retrieve their first blog post? Zero! No one would fucking put up with
that shit. It's absolute madness!

There are **many many** people trying to
figure out how to build their applications in Ember and probably with
Ember-Data. Many people ask me at meetups and online if they should
use Ember and what they should do about the data loading problem. I
always recommend Ember. Ember itself is stable and create for making
applications. However, Ember-Data is completely different. I
recommended people investigate Ember-Data--that they take a peek at
it. Just check it out. Now my position has changed entirely. If you
don't commit to ember-data stay away from the thing. I don't wish this
anger and frustration upon anyone else. No library users should put up
with that crap. If people like myself can barely even get the fucking thing
to work, how the hell are you going do? 

I care greatly about Ember and Ember Data. I think Ember Data is the
most important project right now. Web applications are useless without
data. Ember Data is a very ambitious project. It's trying to solve
very hard problems. It's the best thing we have right now.
Unfortunately the god damn thing is a disgrace. That's why I give up.

I've also submitted a [PR](https://github.com/emberjs/data/pull/995)
to fix this issue so it never happens to anyone else. It's also very
likely this same problem can happen inside Ember which uses promises
internally.
